# rskey

`rskey` is a command-line tool (and bundled Go package) that generates secret
keys interoperable with the format used by RStudio's Workbench, Connect, and
Package Manager products.

It can be used to help manage secrets without the need to install these products
first, and is designed for use in Infrastructure-as-Code and containerised
deployments of these products.

This tool can also serve as a drop-in replacement for:

* RStudio Connect's `rscadmin configure --encrypt-config-value`
  [command](https://docs.rstudio.com/connect/admin/appendix/cli/#rscadmin)

* Package Manager's `rspm encrypt`
  [command](https://docs.rstudio.com/rspm/admin/appendix/encryption/#rspm-encrypt).

* Workbench's `rstudio-server encrypt-password`
  [command](https://docs.rstudio.com/ide/server-pro/rstudio_server_cli/rstudio_server_cli.html#database).

No local license keys are required, either.

**This is not a general-purpose encryption tool.**

## Installation

Binary releases for Windows, macOS, and Linux are available [on
GitHub](https://github.com/rstudio/rskey/releases).

If you have a local Go toolchain you can also install via `go install`:

``` shell
$ go install github.com/rstudio/rskey@latest
```

## Usage

You can generate keys with `rskey generate`. For example:

``` shell
$ rskey generate -o /var/lib/rstudio-pm/rstudio-pm.key
# Or, to simply echo the key to standard input:
$ rskey generate
```

You can then encrypt data (such as database passwords) interactively with `rskey
encrypt`. For example:

``` shell
$ rskey encrypt -f /var/lib/rstudio-pm/rstudio-pm.key
```

Line-separated entries can also be passed on standard input:

``` shell
$ cat passwords.txt | rskey encrypt -f /var/lib/rstudio-pm/rstudio-pm.key
```

An `rskey decrypt` command is also provided.

Secret keys for Workbench are [traditionally generated by the `uuid`
command](https://docs.rstudio.com/ide/server-pro/load_balancing/configuration.html#generating-a-key),
but there is no built-in support for this format in `rskey generate`.

To encrypt or decrypt secrets for use with RStudio Workbench, pass the
`--mode=workbench` flag to the appropriate command. Both key formats are
acceptable:

``` shell
$ rskey generate -o /etc/rstudio/secure-cookie-key
$ rskey encrypt --mode=workbench -f /etc/rstudio/secure-cookie-key
$ echo `uuid` > uuid.key
$ rskey encrypt --mode=workbench -f uuid.key
```

## Details

* Secret key must be kept secret, and anyone in possession of that key can
  decrypt any data encrypted with it.

* Encryption for Connect and Package Manager uses the well-known [NaCl Secretbox
  algorithm](https://pkg.go.dev/golang.org/x/crypto/nacl/secretbox).

* Encryption for Workbench uses AES-128-CBC.

* Key files for Connect and Package Manager are a sequence of 512 hex-encoded,
  securely-generated random bytes. This means that `rskey generate` is analogous
  to `openssl rand -hex 512`.

* Key files for Workbench are 32 or more opaque bytes. Most often they are
  generated by [the `uuid`
  command](https://docs.rstudio.com/ide/server-pro/load_balancing/configuration.html#generating-a-key),
  but you can use the output of `rskey generate` as well.

## API Stability and Versioning

`rskey` and its packages follow strict semantic versioning.

## License

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0. See `LICENSE` for details.
